# Compress Synapse State Tables

An experimental tool that reads in the rows from `state_groups_state` and
`state_group_edges` tables for a particular room and calculates the changes that
could be made that (hopefully) will significantly reduce the number of rows.

This tool currently *does not* write to the database in any way, so should be
safe to run. If the `-o` option is specified then SQL will be written to the
given file that would change the tables to match the calculated state. (Note
that if `-t` is given then each change to a particular state group is wrapped
in a transaction).

The SQL generated by the `-o` option is safe to apply against the database with
Synapse running. This is because the `state_groups` and `state_groups_state`
tables are append-only: once written to the database, they are never modified.
There is therefore no danger of a modification racing against a running synapse.
Further, this script makes its changes within atomic transactions, and each
transaction should not affect the results from any of the queries that synapse
performs.

The tool will also ensure that the generated state deltas do give the same state
as the existing state deltas before generating any SQL.

## Algorithm

The algorithm works by attempting to create a tree of deltas, produced by
appending state groups to different "levels". Each level has a maximum size, where
each state group is appended to the lowest level that is not full.

This produces a graph that looks approximately like the following, in the case
of having two levels with the bottom level (L1) having a maximum size of 3:

```
L2 <-------------------- L2 <---------- ...
^--- L1 <--- L1 <--- L1  ^--- L1 <--- L1 <--- L1
```

The sizes and number of levels used can be controlled via `-l`, and defaults to 3
levels of sizes 100, 50 and 25.

**Note**: Increasing the sum of the sizes of levels will increase the time it
takes for to query the full state of a given state group. By default Synapse
attempts to keep this below 100.


## Example usage

```
$ synapse_compress_state -p "postgresql://localhost/synapse" -r '!some_room:example.com' -o out.sql -t
Fetching state from DB for room '!some_room:example.com'...
Got initial state from database. Checking for any missing state groups...
Number of state groups: 73904
Number of rows in current table: 2240043
Number of rows after compression: 165754 (7.40%)
Compression Statistics:
  Number of forced resets due to lacking prev: 34
  Number of compressed rows caused by the above: 17092
  Number of state groups changed: 2748
New state map matches old one

# It's finished, so we can now go and rewrite the DB
$ psql synapse < out.data
```

## Running Options

- -p [URL] **Required**  
The url for connecting to the postgres database. This should be of the form
"postgresql://username:password@mydomain.com/database"

- -r [ROOM_ID] **Required**  
The room to process. This is the value found in the `rooms` table of the database
not the common name for the room - is should look like: "!wOlkWNmgkAZFxbTaqj:matrix.org"

- -b [MIN_STATE_GROUP]  
The state group to start processing from (non inclusive)

- -n [GROUPS_TO_COMPRESS]  
How many groups to load into memory to compress (starting
from the 1st group in the room or the group specified by -s)

- -l [LEVELS]  
Sizes of each new level in the compression algorithm, as a comma separated list.
The first entry in the list is for the lowest, most granular level, with each 
subsequent entry being for the next highest level. The number of entries in the
list determines the number of levels that will be used. The sum of the sizes of
the levels effect the performance of fetching the state from the database, as the
sum of the sizes is the upper bound on number of iterations needed to fetch a
 given set of state. [default's to 100,50,25]

- -m [COUNT]  
If the compressor cannot save this many rows from the database then it will stop early

- -s [MAX_STATE_GROUP]  
If a max_state_group is specified then only state groups with id's lower than this number are able to be
compressed.

- -o [FILE]  
File to output the SQL transactions to (for later running on the database)

- -t  
If this flag is set then then each change to a particular state group is wrapped in a transaction. This should be done if you wish to apply the changes while synapse is still running.

- -g  
If this flag is set then output the node and edge information for the state_group
directed graph built up from the predecessor state_group links. These can be looked
at in something like Gephi (https://gephi.org)

## Using as python library

The compressor can also be built into a python library as it uses PyO3. It can be
built and installed into the current virtual environment by running `maturin develop`

All the same running options are available, see the comments in the Config struct
in lib.rs for the names of each argument. All arguments other than `db_url` and `room_id`
are optional.

The following code does exactly the same as the command-line example from above:
```
import synapse_compress_state as comp

comp.run_compression(
  db_url="postgresql://localhost/synapse",
  room_id="!some_room:example.com",
  output_file="out.sql",
  transactions=True
)
```

Note: since this library uses Jemalloc, you might get an error of the form:
```
ImportError: /[LONG_PATH]/synapse_compress_state.abi3.so: cannot allocate memory in static TLS block
```
If this happens then try running the following:
```
LD_PATH=/[LONG_PATH]/synapse_compress_state.abi3.so ./my_python_script
```
Or just try disabling jemalloc:
```
$ maturin develop --cargo-extra-args="--no-default-features"
```

## Running tests
There are integration tests for these tool stored in `compressor_integration_tests/`

To run the integration tests, you first need to start up a postgres database
for the libary to talk to. There is a docker-compose file that sets one up
with all of the correct tables. The tests can therefore be run as follows:

```
$ cd compressor_integration_tests/
$ docker-compose up -d
$ cargo test --workspace
$ docker-compose down
```
